feat: pod anti-affinity for istiod, troubleshooting doc for webhook issue (#1509)
defenseunicorns/uds-core: docs/reference/troubleshooting/pepr-istiod-webhooks.md

sidebar:
  order: 1
---

## Overview
During cluster restarts or after upgrades, Istiod and Pepr pods may fail to start properly due to a circular dependency between their admission webhooks.

Both Istiod and Pepr depend on each other’s webhooks being available, which can cause a deadlock if one cannot admit the other’s workloads.

This document explains how to manually resolve the deadlock.

## Symptoms
- Pepr pods are stuck in CrashLoopBackOff or Pending state.
- Istiod pods are stuck in CrashLoopBackOff or Pending state.
- Cluster replicaset events show webhook admission errors like:
```plaintext
Failed to call webhook: error calling webhook "pepr-uds-core"
Failed to call webhook: error calling webhook "istiod-istio-system"
```

## Why This Happens
Both Pepr and Istiod register Kubernetes admission webhooks.
When a cluster restarts, if the webhook targets (pods) aren’t available yet, admission fails, blocking the pods from being recreated — a chicken-and-egg problem.

## Manual Recovery Procedure
Temporarily modify the Pepr mutating and validating webhooks, as well as the Istiod mutating webhook, to exclude each other:

> ### 1. Patch the Pepr Webhooks to Exclude Itself and Istio

Reviewer: Comments on the commands and approach overall here:
- I don't think we actually need any edits to the istio webhooks now that pepr is in ambient mode? Worth validating this for yourself but I was able to get a cluster restored without modifying the istio webhooks.
- When modifying these with patches we need to be careful to not wipe out other config. For example, our default webhook config for pepr also ignores zarf and kube-system. End users could also ignore other namespaces beyond that.

Here's the commands I was able to test successfully with. The "cleanup" one isn't that pretty but it uses the tools we know they have (uds/kubectl) and makes sure we don't delete too much:
```console
# Setup
kubectl patch mutatingwebhookconfiguration pepr-uds-core --type='json' \
  -p='[{
    "op": "add",
    "path": "/webhooks/0/namespaceSelector/matchExpressions/0/values/-",
    "value": "istio-system"
  }]'

kubectl patch validatingwebhookconfiguration pepr-uds-core --type='json' \
  -p='[{
    "op": "add",
    "path": "/webhooks/0/namespaceSelector/matchExpressions/0/values/-",
    "value": "istio-system"
  }]'

# Cleanup
kubectl get mutatingwebhookconfiguration pepr-uds-core -o json | \
  uds zarf tools yq -p json -o json '.webhooks[0].namespaceSelector.matchExpressions[0].values |= map(select(. != "istio-system"))' | \
  kubectl apply -f -

kubectl get validatingwebhookconfiguration pepr-uds-core -o json | \
  uds zarf tools yq -p json -o json '.webhooks[0].namespaceSelector.matchExpressions[0].values |= map(select(. != "istio-system"))' | \
  kubectl apply -f -
```

Reviewer 2: For cleanup, we could also do a `helm rollback` against the latest revision to essentially re-apply the latest release of the operator or do a `helm get manifest` + some `yq` selections to `kubectly apply` just the `MutatingWebhookConfiguration` and `ValidatingWebhookConfiguration` objects. FWIW, the cleanup commands above did work for me.

        "key": "kubernetes.io/metadata.name",
        "operator": "NotIn",
        "values": ["pepr-system", "istio-system"]
      }]
    }
  }]'

kubectl patch validatingwebhookconfiguration pepr-uds-core --type='json' \
  -p='[{
    "op": "replace",
    "path": "/webhooks/0/namespaceSelector",
    "value": {
      "matchExpressions": [{
        "key": "kubernetes.io/metadata.name",
        "operator": "NotIn",
        "values": ["pepr-system", "istio-system"]
      }]
    }
  }]'
```

### 2. Patch the Istiod Mutating Webhook to Exclude Pepr

```bash
kubectl patch mutatingwebhookconfiguration istio-sidecar-injector --type='json' \
  -p='[{
    "op": "replace",
    "path": "/webhooks/0/namespaceSelector",
    "value": {
      "matchExpressions": [{
        "key": "kubernetes.io/metadata.name",
        "operator": "NotIn",
        "values": ["pepr-system"]
      }]
    }
  }]'
```

### 3. Restart the Pepr and Istiod Pods
This isn't always required — typically the pods will retry and succeed once the webhooks have been patched.

```bash
kubectl rollout restart deployment pepr-uds-core -n pepr-system
kubectl rollout restart deployment istiod -n istio-system
```

> This forces Kubernetes to recreate them.

Reviewer: Not sure if it's important to callout but in my experience I saw pepr crash once (while istiod was still spinning up).

Author: reworded line 79 to call out istiod being the determining piece for pods to retry and succeed.

### 4. Restore the Webhook Policies

:::caution
VERY IMPORTANT:
After both Pepr and Istiod pods are running and healthy, revert your webhook configurations by removing the namespace selectors to restore full admission enforcement.
:::

```bash
kubectl patch mutatingwebhookconfiguration pepr-uds-core --type='json' \
  -p='[{"op": "remove", "path": "/webhooks/0/namespaceSelector"}]'

kubectl patch validatingwebhookconfiguration pepr-uds-core --type='json' \
  -p='[{"op": "remove", "path": "/webhooks/0/namespaceSelector"}]'

kubectl patch mutatingwebhookconfiguration istio-sidecar-injector --type='json' \
  -p='[{"op": "remove", "path": "/webhooks/0/namespaceSelector"}]'
```
This restores strict security enforcement in admission control.

:::caution

> While the webhooks are excluding each other, any newly created resources (e.g., Pods) could bypass Istio sidecar injection or Pepr policy enforcement. This is rare but possible — identify and reapply configuration to any workloads started during this window.

Reviewer: Depending on the other comment might be able to rephrase this:
```suggestion
While the Pepr webhooks are excluding `istio-system`, any newly created resources in the `istio-system` namespace (e.g., pods/services) will bypass Pepr policy enforcement. It is important to audit any new/unexpected resources during this time.
```

:::

## Alternative Ideas
Rather than changing webhook failure policies, consider long-term approaches such as:

- Adding a `namespaceSelector` to exclude the `istio-system` namespace from Pepr’s webhooks and vice versa.
- Removing the Istio injection label from Pepr pods (especially if you're using Ambient Mesh).

> These strategies help prevent circular dependencies without relaxing webhook enforcement.

Reviewer: I think with the changes you made this might need to be updated since we're not changing the failure policy and the other two bullets are likely the exact approach we're taking here?

Author: removing altogether

---
title: Istiod and Pepr Startup Failures Due to Webhook Dependencies

sidebar:
  order: 1
---

## Overview
During cluster restarts or after upgrades, Istiod and Pepr pods may fail to start properly due to a circular dependency between their admission webhooks.

Both Istiod and Pepr depend on each other’s webhooks being available, which can cause a deadlock if one cannot admit the other’s workloads.

This document explains how to manually resolve the deadlock.

## Symptoms
- Pepr pods are stuck in CrashLoopBackOff or Pending state.
- Istiod pods are stuck in CrashLoopBackOff or Pending state.
- Cluster replicaset events show webhook admission errors like:
```plaintext
Failed to call webhook: error calling webhook "pepr-uds-core"
Failed to call webhook: error calling webhook "istiod-istio-system"
```

## Why This Happens
Both Pepr and Istiod register Kubernetes admission webhooks.
When a cluster restarts, if the webhook targets (pods) aren’t available yet, admission fails, blocking the pods from being recreated — a chicken-and-egg problem.

## Manual Recovery Procedure

> Temporarily modify the Pepr mutating and validating webhooks, as well as the Istiod mutating webhook, to exclude each other:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Temporarily modify the Pepr mutating and validating webhooks to exclude Istio:
```

---
title: Istiod and Pepr Startup Failures Due to Webhook Dependencies

sidebar:
  order: 1
---

## Overview
During cluster restarts or after upgrades, Istiod and Pepr pods may fail to start properly due to a circular dependency between their admission webhooks.

Both Istiod and Pepr depend on each other’s webhooks being available, which can cause a deadlock if one cannot admit the other’s workloads.

This document explains how to manually resolve the deadlock.

## Symptoms
- Pepr pods are stuck in CrashLoopBackOff or Pending state.
- Istiod pods are stuck in CrashLoopBackOff or Pending state.

> - Cluster logs show webhook admission errors like:

Reviewer: nit: I think this would be `events` not `logs` - likely showing on the replicasets?

```plaintext
Failed to call webhook: error calling webhook "pepr-uds-core"
Failed to call webhook: error calling webhook "istiod-istio-system"
```

## Why This Happens
Both Pepr and Istiod register Kubernetes admission webhooks.
When a cluster restarts, if the webhook targets (pods) aren’t available yet, admission fails, blocking the pods from being recreated — a chicken-and-egg problem.

Temporarily relaxing webhook `failurePolicy` solves the startup deadlock.

## Manual Recovery Procedure

> Temporarily disable the `failurePolicy` for the Pepr and Istiod webhooks, allowing pods to start.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Temporarily modify the `failurePolicy` for the Pepr and Istiod webhooks, allowing pods to start.
```

### 1. Edit the Pepr Webhooks
```bash
kubectl edit mutatingwebhookconfiguration pepr-uds-core

> kubectl edit validatingwebhookconfiguration pepr-uds-core

Reviewer: Kind of a nit, but we should be able to provide `kubectl patch` commands for these rather than stepping through the edit interactively (more copy/paste).

Author: good idea, updated to use patches.

```

In each file, locate:

```yaml
failurePolicy: Fail
```
Change it to:

```yaml
failurePolicy: Ignore
```
Save and exit.

### 2. Edit the Istiod Webhooks
```bash
kubectl edit mutatingwebhookconfiguration istio-sidecar-injector

> kubectl edit validatingwebhookconfiguration istio-validator-istio-system

Reviewer: I may be wrong, but I think you only need to edit the mutating webhook for Istio? Its validating webhook only targets Istio CRs - https://github.com/istio/istio/blob/master/manifests/charts/default/templates/validatingwebhook.yaml#L26-L38

If you do make this change, make sure to update wording, `webhooks` -> `webhook` on this step and `four webhooks` -> `three webhooks`.

Author: validated this and you're right. only the mutating webhook was required.

```

Again, change:

```yaml
failurePolicy: Fail
```
To:

```yaml
failurePolicy: Ignore
```
Save and exit.

### 3. Restart the Pepr and Istiod Pods
Manually delete the stuck pods so they restart:

```bash
kubectl delete pods -n pepr-system -l app=pepr-uds-core
kubectl delete pods -n istio-system -l app=istiod
```
This forces Kubernetes to recreate them.

Now, because `failurePolicy=Ignore`, they will successfully come up even if the webhooks aren’t ready yet.

### 4. Restore the Webhooks Back to Fail
:::caution
VERY IMPORTANT:
After both Pepr and Istiod pods are running and healthy, revert your webhook configurations:
Edit all four webhook configurations again:
Set `failurePolicy: Fail` instead of `Ignore`.
:::

> This restores strict security enforcement in admission control.

Reviewer: Is it also worth noting that they should take careful note of any new resources created while the webhooks are set to ignore as these could bypass istio injection and/or policy enforcement? The case where this could happen should be rare with the changes made in this PR, but it's still a definite risk to call out.

I think the alternative we discussed was excluding Istio/Pepr from each other's webhooks (without changing the policy). If that's something we could easily do with a patch command maybe it's worth trying? Also potentially should revisit if we need to change istio's webhook now that it is in ambient, or if certain label changes would resolve issues there (we may need to remove the istio injection label entirely?).

Author: refactored the doc to use the patch commands that exclude istio/pepr from each others webhooks. remove the failure policy approach.

Reviewer: Resolving this one, see other comments.
